INTRODUCTION TO CIVIL
ENGINEERING

INTRODUCTION
What is Engineering

The term engineering is derived from the Latin ingenium, meaning "cleverness" and Latin ingeniare, meaning
"to contrive, devise".

Engineering is the use of scientific principles to design and build machines, structures, and other items,
including bridges, tunnels, roads, vehicles, and buildings. [Cambridge Academic Content Dictionary].

The American Engineers' Council for Professional Development (ECPD, the predecessor of ABET) has defined
"engineering" as:
The creative application of scientific principles to design or develop structures, machines, apparatus, or
manufacturing processes, or works utilizing them singly or in combination; or to construct or operate the same
with full cognizance of their design; or to forecast their behavior under specific operating conditions; all as
respects an intended function, economics of operation and safety to life and property.

INTRODUCTION
What is Engineering
Engineering is the creative application of science, mathematical methods, and empirical evidence to
the innovation, design, construction, and maintenance of structures, machines, materials,
devices, systems, processes, and organizations. The discipline of engineering encompasses a broad range of
more specialized fields of engineering, each with a more specific emphasis on particular areas of applied
mathematics, applied science, and types of application [Wikipedia].
The concept of engineering has existed since ancient times as humans devised fundamental inventions such as
the pulley, lever, and wheel. Each of these inventions is consistent with the modern definition of engineering,
exploiting basic mechanical principles to develop useful tools and objects [Wikipedia].
Later, as the design of civilian structures, such as bridges and buildings, matured as a technical discipline, the
term civil engineering entered the lexicon as a way to distinguish between those specializing in the construction
of such non-military projects and those involved in the discipline of military engineering.

INTRODUCTION
What is Civil Engineering
Civil engineering is a professional engineering discipline that deals with the design, construction, and
maintenance of the physical and naturally built environment, including public works such as roads, bridges,
canals, dams, airports, sewerage systems, pipelines, structural components of buildings, and railways.
Civil engineering is traditionally broken into a number of sub-disciplines. It is considered the second-oldest
engineering discipline after military engineering, and it is defined to distinguish non-military engineering from
military engineering.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
It is difficult to determine the history of emergence and beginning of civil engineering, however, that the
history of civil engineering is a mirror of the history of human beings on this earth. People used the old
shelter caves to protect themselves of weather and harsh environment, and used a tree trunk to cross the
river, which being the demonstration of ancient age civil engineering.
Civil Engineering has been an aspect of life since the beginnings of human existence. The earliest practices
of Civil engineering may have commenced between 4000 and 2000 BC in Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia
(Ancient Iraq) when humans started to abandon a nomadic existence, thus causing a need for the construction
of shelter. During this time, transportation became increasingly important leading to the development of the
wheel and sailing.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering

Some of the ancient historic civil engineering constructions can be given as follows:
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)
8)

Pyramids in ancient Egypt,
Ziggurats of Mesopotamia,
Acropolis and Parthenon in Greece,
Roman aqueducts,
Via Appia,
Collosseum,
Hanging Gardens of Babylon,
Pharos of Alexandria,

no longer standing

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
1) Pyramids in ancient Egypt:
The Egyptian pyramids are ancient pyramid-shaped masonry structures located in Egypt. Most were built as
tombs for the country's pharaohs and their consorts during the Old and Middle Kingdom periods.
Limestone and sandstone were the main building stones of ancient Egypt.
The pyramids of Giza are among the most recognizable symbols of the civilization of ancient Egypt.
A view of the pyramids at Giza from the plateau to the south of the complex. From left to right, the three
largest are: the Pyramid of Menkaure, the Pyramid of Khafre and the Great Pyramid of Khufu.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
2) Ziggurats of Mesopotamia :
Ziggurats were ancient towering, stepped structures built in the ancient Mesopotamian valley and western
Iranian plateau, having the form of a terraced step pyramid of successively receding stories or levels. They
were made of mud-brick that appear to have served as temples to the ancient gods of Mesopotamia. Ziggurat
bases were square or rectangular. Their walls were sloping.
The ziggurat was built to honor the main god of the city. The tradition of creating a ziggurat started by the
Sumerians, but other civilizations of Mesopotamia, such as the Akkadians, the Babylonians, and the Assyrians,
also built ziggurats for local religions. Each ziggurat was part of a temple complex that included other
buildings. The ziggurats began as a platform (usually oval, rectangular, or square), and was a mastaba-like
structure with a flat top. The sun-baked bricks made up the core of the construction with facings of fired bricks
on the outside. Each step was slightly smaller than the level below it. The number of floors ranged from two to
seven.

mud-brick: an air-dried brick, made of
a mixture of loam, mud, sand and
water mixed with a binding material
such as rice husks or straw.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
3) Acropolis and Parthenon in Greece :
The Acropolis of Athens is an ancient citadel located on a rocky outcrop above the city of Athens and contains
the remains of several ancient buildings of great architectural and historic significance, the most famous being
the Parthenon.
The Parthenon was built under the general supervision of the artist Phidias, who also had charge of the
sculptural decoration. The architects Ictinos and Callicrates began their work in 447 BC, and the building was
substantially completed by 432. However, work on the decorations continued until at least 431. The Parthenon
was built primarily by men who knew how to work marble. These quarrymen had exceptional skills and were
able to cut the blocks of marble to very specific measurements. If the marble blocks were not up to standard,
the architects would reject them.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
4) Roman aqueducts :
The Romans constructed aqueducts throughout their Republic and later Empire, to bring water from outside
sources into cities and towns. They were made from a series of pipes, tunnels, canals, and bridges. They also
supported mining operations, milling, farms, and gardens.
Aqueducts moved water through gravity alone, along a slight overall downward gradient within conduits of
stone, brick, or concrete; the steeper the gradient, the faster the flow.
The most recognizable feature of Roman aqueducts may be the bridges constructed using rounded stone
arches.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
5) The Appian Way (Via Appia) :
The Appian Way is one of the earliest and strategically most important Roman roads of the ancient republic. It
connected Rome to Brindisi, in southeast Italy.
The road is named after Appius Claudius Caecus, the Roman censor who began and completed the first section as
a military road to the south in 312 BC during the Samnite Wars.
The Appian Way was the first long road built specifically to transport troops outside the smaller region of greater
Rome (this was essential to the Romans).
The road began as a leveled dirt road upon which small stones and mortar were laid. Gravel was laid upon this,
which was finally topped with tight fitting, interlocking stones to provide a flat surface.
The road was cambered in the middle (for water runoff) and had ditches on either side of the road which were
protected by retaining walls.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
6) Colosseum :
The Colosseum is an oval amphitheatre in the centre of the city of Rome, Italy. It was the largest amphitheatre ever
built at the time and held 50,000 to 80,000 spectators. Built of travertine limestone, tuff (volcanic rock), and
brick-faced concrete, the Colosseum is just east of the Roman Forum.
Construction began under the emperor Vespasian in AD 72 and was completed in AD 80 under his successor
and heir, Titus.
The Colosseum was badly damaged by a major fire (caused by lightning) which destroyed the wooden upper
levels of the amphitheatre's interior. It was not fully repaired until about 240 and underwent further repairs in
250 or 252 and again in 320.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
7) Hanging Gardens of Babylon :
The Hanging Gardens of Babylon were one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World listed by Hellenic
culture. They were described as a remarkable feat of engineering with an ascending series of tiered gardens
containing a wide variety of trees, shrubs, and vines, resembling a large green mountain constructed of mud
bricks. It was said to have been built in the ancient city of Babylon, near present-day Hillah, Babil province, in
Iraq. The Hanging Gardens' name is derived from the Greek word which means 'overhanging', which has a
broader meaning than the modern English word "hanging" and refers to trees being planted on a raised
structure such as a terrace.
The Hanging Gardens of Babylon were an impressive example of architecture. The gardens formed a
quadrilateral shape. There were stairways that led to the uppermost terraced roofs. The plants hung over
terraces that were supported by stone columns. There were arched vaults, which were located on cubed
fountains. The fountains created a humidity that helped keep the area cool. The shade from the trees also helped
keep the gardens cool. The garden ascended in closely planted levels to form a man-made replica of mountain
greenery. The gardens were supported by an intricate structure of stone pillars, brick walls, and palm tree trunk
beams.

Hanging Gardens of Babylon are no longer
standing.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
8) Pharos of Alexandria :
Pharos of Alexandria, also called the Lighthouse of Alexandria, was a lighthouse built by the Ptolemaic
Kingdom, during the reign of Ptolemy II Philadelphus (280–247 BC), which has been estimated to be at least
100 metres in overall height.
Pharos of Alexandria is one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, for many centuries it was one of the
tallest man-made structures in the world.
The lighthouse was severely damaged by three earthquakes between 956 AD and 1323 and became an
abandoned ruin. It was the third longest surviving ancient wonder (after the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus and
the extant Great Pyramid of Giza), surviving in part until 1480, when the last of its remnant stones were used
to build the Citadel of Qaitbay on the site.
The lighthouse was constructed in the 3rd century BC. The light was produced by a furnace at the top, and the
tower was said to have been built mostly with solid blocks of limestone.

Pharos of Alexandria are no longer
standing.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
Engineers developed techniques for constructing astounding buildings, including cathedrals and castles
during the medieval and Renaissance periods.
Until modern times there was no clear distinction between civil engineering and architecture, and the term
engineer and architect were mainly geographical variations referring to the same occupation, and often
used interchangeably.
Mimar Sinan was the chief Ottoman architect and civil engineer. He was responsible for the construction of
more than 300 major structures and other more modest projects, such as schools. His masterpiece is the
Selimiye Mosque in Edirne, although his most famous work is the Suleiman Mosque in Istanbul.
Mosque is the first of the grand mosques created by Sinan.
The Mihrimah Sultan Mosque, which is also known as the Üsküdar Quay Mosque, was completed in the same
year and has an original design with its main dome supported by three half domes.
Sinan masterfully combined art with functionalism in the bridges he built. The largest of these is the nearly
635 m long Büyükçekmece Bridge. Other important examples are the Ailivri Bridge, the Old
Bridge in Svilengrad on the Maritsa, the Lüleburgaz (Sokullu Mehmet Pasha) Bridge on the Lüleburgaz
Bridge over Drina river
River, the
Bridge over the river Ergene and the Mehmed Paša
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.[38]
While Sinan was maintaining and improving the water supply system of Istanbul, he built arched aqueducts
at several locations within the city. The Ma lova Arch over the Alibey River, which is 257 m long and 35 m
high, has two tiers of arches, and is one of the best examples of its kind.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
1) Hagia Sophia (Ayasofya) is a Late Antique place of worship in Istanbul. Built in 537 as the patriarchal
cathedral of the imperial capital of Constantinople, it was the largest Christian church of the eastern Roman
Empire (the Byzantine Empire) and the Eastern Orthodox Church, except during the Latin Empire from 1204
to 1261, when it became the city's Roman Catholic cathedral. In 1453, it was converted into a mosque. In
1935 Turkish Republic established it as a museum. In 2020, it re-opened as a mosque.
It was designed by Anthemius of Tralles, and Isidore of Miletus.
The Hagia Sophia is a masonry construction. The structure has brick and mortar joints that are 1.5
times the width of the bricks. The mortar joints are composed of a combination of sand and minute ceramic
pieces distributed evenly throughout the mortar joints.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
2) Sheikh Matar Mosque or Sheikh Mutahhar Mosque (Turkish:
Matar Camii) is a historical mosque in
Turkey, best known for its unique minaret based on four columns, dubbed the Four-legged Minaret
(Turkish: Dört
Minare).
According to an inscription attached at the minaret, the mosque was built by Hajji Hüseyin, son of Hajji Ömer during
the reign of Ag Qoyunlu Sultan
Han in 1500. Locally, it is also known as the "
Padishah Mosque".
The mosque is a single-dome, quadratic-plan building having stone masonry walls alternating with brick. There are
three windows at each side, and two in the front and backside each, all arched. The two windows on the qibla wall
are closed with masonry. It has a covered area of 221 m2 , and can hold up to 500 worshipers.

The mosque underwent a restoration in 1960 through the General
Directorate of Foundations.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
3) The Selimiye Mosque (Turkish: Selimiye Camii) is an Ottoman imperial mosque, which is located in the city
of Edirne (formerly Adrianople), Turkey is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The mosque was commissioned
by Sultan Selim II, and was built by the architect Mimar Sinan between 1568 and 1575. It was considered
by Sinan to be his masterpiece and is one of the highest achievements of Islamic architecture.
The complex includes a large mosque as well as a religious school (medrese), a primary school, and a
marketplace. It is laid out on a rectangular compound enclosed by a wall with several gates on each side.
The main entrance is on the northwest side of the rectangular enclosure (the side opposite the qibla).
Entering the gate, one emerges onto a large open space that surrounds the mosque on three sides. The main
entrance to the mosque is situated directly across the open space from the main gate in the enclosure wall.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
The science of classical mechanics, sometimes called Newtonian mechanics, formed the scientific basis of much of
modern engineering.
In the 18th century, the term civil engineering was coined to incorporate all things civilian as opposed to military
engineering. The first institution for the teaching of civil engineering, the École Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées was
established in France.
École Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées (renamed École des ponts ParisTech), founded in 1747 by Daniel-Charles
Trudaine, is one of the oldest and one of the most prestigious French Grandes Écoles.
Following the creation of the Corps of Bridges and Roads in 1716, the King's Council decided in 1747 to found a
specific training course for the state's engineers, as École royale des ponts et chaussées. In 1775, the school took its
current name as École nationale des ponts et chaussées, by Daniel-Charles Trudaine, in a moment when the state
decided to set up a progressive and efficient control of the building of roads, bridges and canals, and in the training of
civil engineers. The school's first director, from 1747 until 1794, was Jean-Rodolphe Perronet, engineer, civil service
administrator. Without lecturer, fifty students initially taught themselves geometry, algebra, mechanics and hydraulics.
Visits of building sites, cooperations with scientists and engineers and participation to the drawing of the map of the
kingdom used to complete their training, which was usually four to twelve years long.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
John Smeaton was the first self-proclaimed civil engineer and is often regarded as the "father of civil engineering". He
was an English civil engineer responsible for the design of bridges, canals, harbors, and lighthouses. He was also a
capable mechanical engineer and an eminent physicist. Using a model water wheel, Smeaton conducted experiments for
seven years, determining ways to increase efficiency. Smeaton introduced iron axles and gears to water wheels. Smeaton
also made mechanical improvements to the Newcomen steam engine. Smeaton designed the third Eddystone Lighthouse
(1755–59) where he pioneered the use of 'hydraulic lime' (a form of mortar which will set under water) and developed a
technique involving dovetailed blocks of granite in the building of the lighthouse.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
Isambard Kingdom Brunel was an English civil engineer who is considered:
- one of the most ingenious and prolific figures in engineering history,
- one of the 19th-century engineering giants,
- one of the greatest figures of the Industrial Revolution who changed the face of the English landscape with his
groundbreaking designs and ingenious constructions.
Brunel built dockyards, the Great Western Railway (GWR), a series of steamships including the first propeller-driven
transatlantic steamship, and numerous important bridges and tunnels. His designs revolutionized public transport and
modern engineering. Though Brunel's projects were not always successful, they often contained innovative solutions to longstanding engineering problems. During his career, Brunel achieved many engineering firsts.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
In 1818 the Institution of Civil Engineers was founded in London, and in 1820 the eminent engineer Thomas Telford became its
first president. The institution received a Royal Charter in 1828, formally recognising civil engineering as a profession. Its
charter defined civil engineering as:
«the art of directing the great sources of power in nature for the use and convenience of man, as the means of production and
of traffic in states, both for external and internal trade, as applied in the construction of roads, bridges, aqueducts, canals,
river navigation and docks for internal intercourse and exchange, and in the construction of ports, harbours, moles, breakwaters
and lighthouses, and in the art of navigation by artificial power for the purposes of commerce, and in the construction and
application of machinery, and in the drainage of cities and towns.»

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
The first private college to teach civil engineering in the United States was Norwich University, founded in 1819 by Captain
Alden Partridge. The first degree in civil engineering in the United States was awarded by Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in
1835. The first such degree to be awarded to a woman was granted by Cornell University to Nora Stanton Blatch in 1905.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
In the UK during the early 19th century, the division between civil engineering and military engineering (served by the Royal
Military Academy, Woolwich), coupled with the demands of the Industrial Revolution, spawned new engineering education
initiatives:
- the Class of Civil Engineering and Mining was founded at King's College London in 1838, mainly as a response to the
growth of the railway system and the need for more qualified engineers,
- the private College for Civil Engineers in Putney was established in 1839, and
the UK's first Chair of Engineering was established at the University of Glasgow in 1840.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
Mühendishane-i Bahr-i Hümayun, which interprets into the Imperial School of Naval Engineering, was established in 1773 to
provide western style education in engineering for the first time in the Ottoman Empire. It trained expert personnel on
shipbuilding and nautical charts. The founder of the school located at Haliç dockyard was Baron de Tott, who was a
Hungarian aristocrat. Baron de Tott played a significant role in the innovation movement of the Ottoman, and also taught at the
school. The first head teacher however, was Seyyid Hasan Hodja, an Algerian who spoke many languages and was educated
in Marine Engineering. It is thought that the school’s library is enriched with work translated from foreign languages.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
Mühendishane-i Berr-i Hümayun (the Imperial School of Land Engineering) was established in 1795 during the period of Selim
III to train artillery officers. It was an extension of the Mühendishane-i Bahr-i Hümayun and the duration of education was four
years. Selim III placed importance in the schools development and sent books from the
Palace. The Sultan, who
enabled the opportunity of establishing a printing house as part of the school also contributed to its equipment by donating
observing and measuring instruments. Subjects such as, military engineering, cannonball foundry, artillery and astronomy were
among the lectures administered at the school. The contribution of French academics and engineers is also considerable. In
1847, lessons in the field of architecture were also introducted into the curriculum at the Mühendishane-i Berr-i Hümayun and
the commencement of western architectural knowledge had begun. The Mühendishane-i Berr-i Hümayun converted into
Hendese-i Mülkiye (Technical School of Engineering) in 1883 and thereafter by adopting the name Mühendis Mekteb-i Alisi
(Certified Engineering School) in 1909, it provided education to train civil architect and engineers.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
In consequence of engineering and architecture education that was reformed with the establishment of the Republic,
Mühendis Mekteb-i Alis (Certified Engineering School) was organized as a school that provided training including the
branches of building, road, railway and waterworks. In 1929, in addition to existing waterworks and road branches in the
School, civil work department was also added and in the area of architecture, the education was commenced. Certified
Engineering School, which produced first graduates in 1931, trained technical personnel for public works of the Turkish
Republic. In 1940’s, Certified Engineering School strengthened itself with the participation of academic members, who
departed from Germany and Switzerland, and it became an exclusive and a pioneering education institution in the field of
technical education.
Prof. Karl von Terzaghi, was a geotechnical engineer, and known as the "father of soil mechanics and geotechnical
engineering", conducted research and taught in higher educational institutions in Certified Engineering School in Turkey.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
In 1944, Certified Engineering School turned into stanbul Technical University. In the beginning, academic staff of the faculties
were quite limited and later on, expansion of academic staff led to specialising in the branches of sciences and staffing. Istanbul
Technical University consisted of the faculties of Civil Engineering, Architecture, Mechanical Engineering and Electrical Engineering
in the first years.

INTRODUCTION
History of Civil Engineering
In 1863, Robert College was founded in Bebek ( stanbul) by Christopher Robert, a wealthy American philanthropist, and Cyrus
Hamlin. Robert College is the oldest continuously operating American school outside the United States. It was incorporated under
the laws of the State of New York.
Robert College School of Engineering was opened in 1912, with civil engineering, mechanical engineering and electrical
engineering as the three areas of instruction. Robert College was transformed into Bo aziçi University in 1971,

REFERENCES

1) http://www.thecivilengg.com/History.php
2) https://archeyes.com/ziggurat-temples-architecture-mesopotamia/
3) http://www.ce.boun.edu.tr/?q=history
4) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_engineering
5) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Civil_engineering
6) http://www.thecivilengg.com
7) https://global.itu.edu.tr/global-itu/history
8) Civil Engineer's Handbook of Professional Practice by Karen Lee Hansen and Kent E. Zenobia
9) https://www.nationalgeographic.org/encyclopedia/roman-aqueducts/
10) https://www.ck12.org/section/engineering-in-medieval-and-renaissance-europe/
11) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%89cole_des_ponts_ParisTech

